Since you have it in the Bay Area, you may actually be able to understand what, when
I tell you where the novels here come, then Zurich is actually the Bay Area in some sense
anyway, not literally, but the fact is that I live in the hills of Oakland in East Bay
and there's a drive along the ridge of the hills.
I was up there one evening just at dusk when the light is such that the Bay itself, which
you can look down on, you'll see San Francisco and Marin County across the Bay and San Jose
to the south and Berkeley and Oakland in front of you and a lot of water in the middle,
but at a particular time in the evening that water simply turned black and I was up there
looking at that and I thought, my God, you can't even tell at the bay it looks like a
gigantic hole in the ground and immediately I thought, what would a city be like to rebuild
a gigantic shaft into the earth like that? What effect might that kind of physical environment
have on the psychology of the people who lived in that city, which is how the whole symbolism,
the religious symbolism of the city of Zurich came to me?
Yeah, good. I was glad to get that. Every once in a while, we'll have an author tell us where he
gets the idea for a story. For instance, Rogers Alasney told us how he got the idea for road marks,
which just made the whole show. It was beautifully fascinating story. It's interesting,
authors get their ideas. Yeah, usually you don't exactly know where you got your ideas,
but that was a very clear vision that came to me. I hate to use that word because it seems to
mean more than it does, but it was just a particular way that I saw something that it made me think.
Okay, let me just pick out one short story. It's my favorite, the dance of the changer and the three.
Did you have an impetus or an origin behind that one?
Yes, I did. As a matter of fact, that's another one I can pinpoint.
I had been reading of all people, Rogers Alasney. We've seen him be mentioning him a lot here.
And Roger at that time, this has been the late 60s, was working a lot with mythology in his
science fiction. And I got interested in his work. I love his work. And I was always interested in
mythology itself. And it occurred to me that mythology tells a whole lot about the fears,
the hopes, the beliefs of humanity. And that indeed, if any alien creature that ever came to
this planet and wanted to find out something about what makes humanity tick, they could do far worse
than to study some of our myths. And I suddenly just, there was a little skeptic that goes on
in my head and I turned that around and said, well, I like to just think and write about aliens.
And it's very difficult to write about an alien being inside because I personally believe that
aliens are inexplicable to us. We're never going to understand this totally. So I thought possibly
a good way of dealing with the portrayal of an alien or an entire alien race would be to do it
circuitously by telling an alien myth. And that is exactly what the dance of the changer in the
three years, of course, is an alien myth. And the myth itself is supposed to tell you a lot about
the psychology of the race. Yeah, when I read that, I got the impression that one of the points of
was that aliens are likely to be totally incomprehensible to us, that there can be no real communication.
Yeah, that was the basic point. Yeah, I've been trying to make that point in number of my stories.
There's another one that I wrote earlier called Topkran, which makes much the same point, but not
quite as dramatically as that does. Okay, could you tell me this about that dance or dance of the
changer in the three? Was there a relationship between the dance and the myth you told in the way
that they wiped out the human beings? Was there a relationship between them? I don't know, frankly.
And I don't want to know. The method that I used in writing that was, since I believed the
alien would be totally ununderstandable to us, every time the story that I was telling
became too comprehensible, I would write something that made no sense whatever.
So the myth itself, of course, is kind of a self-canceling myth. If you actually analyze it,
there's a certain circularity to it. It has a dramatic coherence.
But it's not a story that we would ever tell about ourselves that would resonate with the human
psyche. And I wanted to end the story with something totally inexplicable happening, just to
to underscore and emphasize the fact that these creatures were aliens. And I wanted it to be
something that none of us is going to understand. And that meant inevitably that I had to be sure I
didn't understand it either. Okay, good. Could I just end this line of question you were asking?
You then, do I take it that you, this is a totally personal question. It doesn't involve your work
so much. But I take it then that you think that we may run across the alien species someday in the
galaxy? I think that we may. I have no idea if we ever will. There are so many things against it.
You have no idea if there are actually any creatures out there. It seems just mathematically that
there must be. But they're going to be so far away that I have no idea if we will actually ever be
able to travel between stars. Despite the fact that science fiction is always writing about
traveling between stars, it may well prove to be an impossibility. So I have no idea if we're ever
going to manage to meet them. We might get in touch with them through radio or through light
beams or something like that. But even then, I mean, you know, messages traveling at the speed of
light are going to take hundreds and thousands of years to pass back and forth between stars.
So I don't know. On the other hand, possibly what we know about the laws of physics is not complete.
And the speed of light is not an unattainable velocity. And possibly
trans light speeds will be possible for us so that we can get out there. And if we ever do get out
there, or if indeed other creatures have discovered how to travel faster than speed of light, they may
come here. But with our present knowledge, it seems very unlikely. We talked to Dr. Robert
Forward not too long ago, and he was telling us about the latest and possible stellar drive.
It has something to do with twister space, where he seems to have worked at that where it could be
theoretically possible. Well, it may very well be. Yeah, I saw a lecture here in fact a few years ago.
But some of his ideas about that. And they do seem possible. But again, there's still theories at
this point, and they're nowhere near being hardware. That's right. Listen, I would, I think your
perspective on science fiction is a valuable one. I can't, I mean, the reading you must do in the
field has to be immense to anthologize like you do. And I've, you've read science fiction, I guess,
steadily for over 25 years. I just want to ask you a few general questions about the field from
your perspective. In the time you've been in it, since you've been a serious fan of the present,
have you seen any big changes in the field? And so what would they be?
There have been enormous changes in the field since then. When I started reading it, it was a
genre of adventure fiction. Almost exclusively, there are very, very few
stories that would be called serious fiction in general. There are a few, but not too many.
There were the exceptions. Whereas today, although we still have our usual complement of adventure
stories, those are, you know, they're fun stories. There's nothing wrong with them. But we have a much
wider variety of things that we can write. We can, for instance, a novel like Sirk, which is,
oh, it's an adventure story, but it's also a story about religion, about philosophy, and so
forth. Something like that simply could not have been published in science fiction, but when I was
first reading it, there wouldn't have been anybody who would have taken a chance on publishing it.
And I doubt very many people would have enjoyed it, because they certainly, they simply weren't
ready for it. I'm sure I wouldn't have liked that story. Well, maybe I would have. But I would
have had a good deal of trouble understanding that story when I was 11 or 12 years old,
first reading science fiction. There's been a great deal of improvement in the variety of
things we can do in science fiction. And in the literary techniques that are available to
science fiction writers, largely that's just a matter of perceived opportunity.
People now realize that it is possible, because people have demonstrated it by doing it,
that it is possible to have good characterization in a science fiction story, not simply surface
characterization, where you can tell a villain because they were a black ass or something.
And there was a lot of experimentalism that went on in the 60s, and indeed it is still going on to
some extent. But I think that today there's, I characterize the whole change as broadening
and opening up the entire field. I don't think there's anything that can be done in any branch
of literature that can't be done, also in science fiction, with the added dimension of the speculation
about the future. Okay, good. We usually ask the authors we talk to also to give their impression
of the old conflicts, say, between science fiction and the mainstream. Some authors think that
science fiction deserves its own special category, that it's unique and fans and authors want to
keep it that way. Other people feel that there should be really no separation between science
fiction and mainstream, and it's only an artificial thing done by the publishing industry. Do you
have any opinions on that? I think both those things are true. It's an artificial thing done
by the publishing industry because they found that it's a real thing among readers, and it's
not just in science fiction, it's in any genre. If you want to read a novel about, oh, whatever,
there's a class of novels primarily for women, for instance, in which women discover their
sexuality or how to control their lives or things like that. Those were very popular recently.
There's a particular way of packaging such a novel. If you want to read a Gothic,
that there's a particular way of packaging that or a Western or something like that.
And even a mainstream novel, there's a particular way of packaging that, a particular kind of cover,
particular type styles that have been found to be more effective than others. Everything that is
published is a genre. Mainstream itself is a genre. As for writing it, I don't think that people
should approach the writing of science fiction as anything other than simply writing a story,
which happens to be science fiction. I think they should be aware, however, of what's been done
in science fiction before so they don't repeat everything. It really gets embarrassing when
you see a very good writer who hasn't worked in science fiction before turn to science fiction and
produce something that is just old hat. It's been done in science fiction for 50 years.
You get embarrassed with this person. John Updike did a short story in New Yorker about three years
ago and it's just embarrassing because he obviously didn't know the feel.
So I think that anybody who is writing science fiction today
should simply approach it as telling the very best story that he or she can.
And not underestimating the audience, but knowing the audience, knowing what they like the most.
And if you want to tell a story that's heavy on philosophy or something like that, you've got to
know how to make the people enjoy it while you're doing it. But you have to know that when you're
writing any kind of story. You have to know your audience. You have to write to people. You can't
live the old idea of writing from your soul and just putting it out there pure. It's
absolutely nonsense to me. I mean that's just babbling. You may as well just keep it tiring.
If you want to write and be read by other people, you've got to give them enjoyment.
That doesn't mean that you have to write to them as though they were 12 years old.
Because if you give them a really solid,
a really solid piece of writing, if it is good, if it is a quality piece of writing,
it's going to find its audience. A quality piece of writing is something that is enjoyable.
Curious, if it isn't enjoyable, there is no quality to it. I don't believe any of these people who
talk about downbeat fiction, for instance, as being depressing. I suppose, you know, if you read too
much of it at a time, it can be, but a given story, even if the ending is, you know, everybody dies
or the main character shoots herself or something, if the story is a valid story and has an emotional
impact and tells you something about the quality of life, then I don't get the impression of that.
Because that's a moving experience. I've learned something from it. The most recent story I've
read, as a matter of fact, was The Death of the Iliac by Leo Tolstoy, which is, of course,
the death of a man. It's a classic story. Just to hear that that's what it's about
would perhaps turn a lot of people off and say, oh gee, that's going to be very depressing.
But I don't think so. I read that story and I was delighted with it.
That's kind of rambling, but I suppose that answers your question.
Well, that's fine. That's going to make the whole show by itself. Listen, I had two more questions.
You can make the answers as brief as you'd like. I want you to say just a little bit about fantasy,
in particular, in one of your fantasy annals. I think it was number three. You said that the
level of writing in fantasy you thought was probably higher than it was in science fiction.
Could you comment on that and maybe say a word as to why fantasy has become so popular?
I'm not sure why fantasy has become so popular, so I can't comment on that.
The only guess I can make is that there does seem to be a correlation between
periods of economic depression and popularity of pure fantasy. People just seem to want to get
away from that more. But that's a guess. As to the quality of the writing, it's simply a technical
matter. It's very difficult in writing about the future, about other worlds,
and strange creatures and so forth. To write with the kind of precise detail that you can write
about the present day, writing about things that you see every day, hear every day, smell every day,
and it's simply technically more easy to pick out details in a scene to tell
that will be recognizable immediately to a reader. There are many examples of
mainstream writers who can set a scene with a single sentence or a single paragraph,
or can tell you enormous amounts of information about what's going on, simply by
naming things. There's a famous story by J. D. Fallinger in which he spends one paragraph
telling you the contents of the medicine cabinet of the glass family. And once you know what's in
their medicine cabinet, you know a whole lot about that family. Now imagine trying to do that
about a family that lives seven million years in the future, or even 700 years in the future.
You wouldn't even know what those things in medicine cabinet were. So it's very difficult to do that
as briefly as you do it in contemporary fiction or any story that's been said in contemporary times.
And since a lot of fantasy is said in contemporary times, fantasy writers have the opportunity to
use that kind of detail. And that's what I meant when I said that the level of writing in fantasy
tends to be higher. It's because it's easier.
Okay, good. My last question then would just be about your own future writing. I wondered what
we can expect from you in terms of your own outputs, say in terms of novels and short stories in the
future. Are you planning on going ahead and doing some more? Yes, I am. As I say, I'm working on a
couple of very short stories, maybe two or three thousand for each, just because I have a couple
of ideas I want to write. There are a couple of editors who are interested in them. But mainly,
right now, I'm working on a new novel, which we published probably by Timescape next year.
And it'll be quite, quite different from CERC. But it'll be very much the same kind of novel in
that it will have an adventure story up front, which I hope will be interesting. But it'll have a lot
of stuff under the surface, not necessarily symbolism as such. But there's building a lot of
characterization. I'm going to be working with mythic archetypes again here. I don't know exactly
what I'm going to be doing with that yet. I've worked out all the details. It's still very early
in the book. But I think it's going to be very interesting. Okay, is there anything at all,
any kinds of ideas or crusades or things you're interested in that you'd like to
to say before we finish? The only crusade I have currently is against people who use the term
sci-fi. And I'm sure you've heard that before. I don't think I have to explain it. Anybody who
says sci-fi around me, might as well call me a nigger. Yeah, okay, we can understand that.
And I tell this to everybody. You obviously don't use this term, but a number of people who have
interviewed me have used that term. And I always say, you know, do not use that term or I'm simply
going to hang up the phone or I'm going to walk out of the television studio.
Yeah, I can agree with that totally. Okay, listen, what we do now, we will, these shows are usually
aired maybe two months or so after we interview them, you know, after the interview,
we will send you the completed tapes of the show. Great, yeah, I do want to see that.
At this point, we premiered our show premiered April 5th and the network has not yet sent us
a list of stations which carry us around the country. When we get that, we can also shoot that to you.
Yeah, I'd like to have that too, thank you. Yeah, Mr. Carr, as I understand it currently,
there aren't any stations in the, in fact, I don't think we have any stations in California yet.
We go as far west as Montana, but we haven't quite made it to the West Coast.
Well, it isn't that important that my friends hear me.
Okay, listen, you might, just before we hang up here, you might, you might give us a little bit
of advice because, you know, in your experiences as an editor, we've been doing this show for a
and we've interviewed an enormous number of science fiction authors. We have some pretty
valuable material, you know, some excellent interviews with Jack Williamson, a EVAN vote,
you know, some of the old timers and stuff. We think that if we type these up in an interview form,
you know, that we would have a good chance of getting a book published, you know, of interviews.
Who might we contact or how might we go about that? Do you have any advice?
I have very little advice on that. I'll tell you that there are a lot of people who are doing
interviews these days and you're probably aware that there have been a number of
interviews published, most recently, Charles Blaspho, Greenbakers, and McCall.
But there are a number of others. And for instance, there's a radio station, WCAI, or
KBFA out here, excuse me, WCAI, or the Pacifica radio station out here. I've been doing a
science fiction interview show for about nine or four or five years now and they have an enormous
number of pages of very good interviews too and they're interested in telling me stuff. So I don't
know what they're doing. What you might do, the one person who could tell you a lot more than I
could would be Richard Luthor, who lives in either Oakland or Berkeley, I think, Berkeley,
Claremont Avenue. And he's more or less connected with that radio show, so he will know what they've
been doing about trying to find a publisher. I suggest you call him and find out what he knows
the right term, whatever. You'll know a whole lot more, I think.
Okay, yeah, we realize a lot of people have been doing interviews. Okay, listen, we've taken
enough of your time. This has taken longer than I thought it would, but it's been an excellent
interview and we want to thank you very much for it. And good, you had a good question. Yeah,
well, we had a lot more, but it's getting kind of, you know, it's getting kind of late. Well,
back here it's getting kind of late. Out there it isn't, but listen, when your next novel comes up,
or maybe one of your anthologies or something, we might want to update some of the shows,
we might drop you a line and talk to you for a little time sometime in the future again.
Okay, let's do it. Okay, thank you very much, Mr. Karm. Okay, bye now. Bye.